---
layout: post
title: "App Academy Week Four"
date: 2015-05-16
backgrounds:
    - http://res.cloudinary.com/charliecloud/image/upload/v1434915155/charblog/w4p1_bg.jpg
thumb: http://res.cloudinary.com/charliecloud/image/upload/v1434915153/charblog/w4p1_thumb.jpg
categories: app academy, rails
tags: mvc, authorization, authentication, sessions
---

I have some time to breathe this weekend. It feels so good just to relax for
a bit. The material for week has been about authentication and authorization.
Having experienced planning and creating authentications/authorizations in
a previous app, I felt better prepared. However, the week didn't go by without
challenges.

The last post felt poorly written and badly thought out. I'm hoping this one
is a better reflection instead of simply an overview of the topics that I
covered over the week.

Summary: Diving into rails, with an emphasis on authentication and authorization.
Cookies? Chocolate chip or web data? Lessons in ActiveRecord and SQL are paying off
big time. Not a developer, yet.

Day 22:

After taking the assessment, it was right back into rails. CJ, one of the awesome
teachers, gave us a simplified road map of how we were going to break down rails
last week.

1. SQL: I feel comfortable making queries in SQL, using ActiveRecord, and
creating custom SQL queries in AR if needed.
2. Migrations: Migrations, covered last week, are not bad at all. I have the
habit of creating a whole new migration for each table which I'm trying to phase
out but otherwise don't have a problem updating or rolling back as I'm developing
an app.
3. Models: This is just ruby. Model is the M in MVC and honestly wasn't hard to
pick up since we spent a week covering OOP/OOD in ruby.
4. Controllers & Routing: Covered this week!
5. Views: Also covered this week!
6. Javascript: Next week.
7. Backbone: Week after that.
8. Views & Routing (Backbone): ???
9. CSS: ???
10. Profit???

Alright so today is routing. When you generate a new rails project, there's a
```routes.rb``` file in ```config/``` which is used to create, you guessed it,
routes. Before we jump into some built in methods that rails provides, we had
to learn about the request-response cycle. In it's most basic form when you
type in an URL into your browser, you send a request. Specifically a HTTP
GET request which is sent to a server in which that URL is associated with
and it retrieves the information you requested (aka: a response). How simple
is that? I mean, it's more complicated underneath and I know I've left out
many details but overall a simple GET request just does that. In addition,
there are three more frequently used HTTP methods that we covered including
POST, PATCH, and DELETE. Although these four aren't the only methods available,
they are commonly used. So what do they do? They each do what their names suggest.
POST, posts data or sends data to a server. PATCH, sends data that will be used
to update/change data and DELETE simply sends a request to delete data.

To further visualize the process, I ran through these methods using Twitter.
Visiting ```https://twitter.com``` sends a GET request to get the home page
of twitter. There's a sign in button, sign up button, and multiple links.
Filling out the fields for sign in and pressing the sign in button sends a
POST request in which then Twitter's servers validate the sent data (more on this on
a later day this week.) and then GETs me my Twitter feed. I'm feeling like
my password is a bit insecure, so I want to change it. I go to the change
password form, fill out what I want my new password to be and then click the button
which then sends a PATCH request with the form data. Twitter receives this and
understands that this is a PATCH request, looks up my info, makes sure
everything is valid and then updates my password. Password successfully changed!
I'm having second doubts and don't think I'll ever have a secure enough password,
so I decide to delete my account. I go to the delete account button in my
settings and confirm to delete my account. DELETE request and my account is gone.

Rails' routing helps generate the URLs and corresponding HTTP methods. Before,
we jumped into using built in methods that create the routes we need, we
created them manually using ```HTTP method '\path_name' => 'controller#method.'```
By building these routes, I was able to see what the macro, ```resources```, was
doing. It creates all the routes for you, unless you also add the ```only``` or
```except``` specifications. Using ```rake routes``` will give you a list of
possible routes which are divided into columns starting from the left: HTTP verb/method,
URI Pattern (think URL for a given page) and controller action/method. When
visiting a given URL, rails will go down these routes and do run the first one
which matches the given URO pattern. Depending on the method, it will run the
pairing controller method.

There are seven main controller actions. Today is definitely a list creating sort
of day.

1. Index: Renders an index page which is usually the landing page of a given website.
2. New: GETs a new form which is used to create data.
3. Create: POSTs form data to create something: new account, new tweet, etc.
4. Edit: GETs a new form which is used to update data.
5. Update: POSTs form data to update something: username, passwords, etc.
6. Destroy: Sends a request to look for and destroy something.
7. Show: GETs something to be displayed.

In rails, each of these controller actions also needs to either render or redirect to
a file. By default, they will try to render their ```#{method_name} + 'html.erb'``` file.
So much to cover. So little time. Just for today, we simply out the response in JSON format,
so we could see the output.

The overall process is intuitive. Routing in itself isn't too hard of a concept to swallow.
Simply check the routes, look at what controller action is involved, check the type of
HTTP method and invoke as needed. I felt like I had a solid grasp on it by the end of the
day.

Some awesome gems to help with debugging: ```better_errors``` and ```binding_of_caller```.
Better errors provides more detailed errors on the browser when testing and binding of caller
provides a terminal-like bar to the page to check elements near the error (similar to how
we used byebug in pre-rails).

Day 23-24:

Great I got HTTP methods down and how it's related to rails, but there is a pretty big
problem that hasn't been addressed. HTTP is stateless. What? Huh? Stateless? Is it a
solid, liquid, gas or plasma? I kid. What it actually means is that every request
is independent of any other request. It was designed this way to reduce the number
of errors in server software and in addition to make it easier to debug potential
problems. Why is this important? In the Twitter example, if I logged in with my account
it posts data but that really did nothing. It just sent a signal. Now all future requests
will never know that I actually logged in. As a solution, cookies were introduced. Most
cookies are encrypted files that live within the browser that holds information to
tell every other request a bit of info before proceeding. There are two types of cookies,
permanent and session cookies. Since nothing lasts forever, permanent cookies actually last
a maximum of 20 years whereas session cookies last until the browser closes. Most websites
that have some sort of login functionality probably use permanent cookies since it makes it
easier on the user to not have to log in every time they visit the site. Other sites like
banks most likely use session cookies or even shorter living forms of cookies to ensure
that your sensitive bank information isn't in a risky place. In any case, cookies are the
implementation of theoretical sessions. Sessions is the concept of persisting data throughout
each request.

Rails has a built in sessions method as ```ActionController::Base#session``` which is used
to produce a hash, similar to the ```params``` method. It's used to retrieve and set the
state or info of a given use cycle. Man look at all this learning that's happening.
The built in sessions method helps can store things like arrays and hashes filled with data
whereas the cookie that may be stored on a browser can only contain text/strings.

Then we got into Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF) and how to prevent it. The rundown is that
to prevent tampering of session data, an extra attribute, authentication tokens, a string of random characters,
are generated and checked between actions. By default, rails requires that we set a hidden input field
with a generated authenticity token. The key take away is to always use authenticity tokens
in forms.

Now that I got the basics down, I moved onto validations. Validations are done in both the
database and in the models. By setting up validations, data can be ensured to fit a given
criteria before being saved to the database. In addition, the model layer validations
provide helpful error messages that can be accessed through the built in ```errors```
method which like params and session, return a hash. There are tons of built in
[validations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html). There are
also tons of possible [callbacks](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_callbacks.html) which
can be used to interact with a object at any point of its life cycle. Awesome right? Talk about
total control.

Now we have validations set we're set right? Well except we don't necessarily want to save
everything to a database. The main example are passwords. Going back to when
[Slack](http://venturebeat.com/2015/03/27/slack-launches-two-factor-authentication-and-reveals-it-was-hacked-last-month/)
was "hacked." If they saved their users passwords in the database, now those attackers
have SO MUCH DATA. Those email/passwords could be used to access various other sites those users
may have similar account info for (and let's be honest, many many people reuse the same
email and password for lots of sites). Thankfully, they took the step to hash the passwords and
save the password hash instead. A hash function is any algorithm that "scrambles" a given data, usually
also adding a salt, more randomized characters, which is mathematically difficult to decipher.
One main hashing algorithm is called [bcrypt](http://bcrypt.sourceforge.net/) which is popular
in encrypting passwords. By hashing passwords, even if a malicious attacker gained access of
a hashed password, it would take them effort to decipher it. Using the bcrypt gem, it's relatively
easy to hash passwords within a rails app. The main methods we want to use from the gem are
```BCrypt::Password.create()```, ```BCrypt::Password.new()```, and ```is_password?()```.
The whole day was spent practicing creating small CRUD apps and implementing authentication.
Authentications is a pretty streamlined process and many places seem to use other external
gems such as [devise](https://github.com/plataformatec/devise) to do a better job than rolling
out a custom authentication system. Getting to know pieces that goes into authentications
will be useful when understanding weak points in web security in the future. Also, it's one
topic that I have a huge interest in. Check out this [talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGwNQfjLTp0) to
learn more about hash functions and bloom filters. Curtis does an awesome job in breaking it
down.

Now we simply have to implement some form of authorization. Authorization, simply put, is setting
access for users depending on sessions. By requiring someone to log in before they can post a tweet
is reasonable or else we would have lots of John Smiths and Jane Does posting. Rails makes it
ridiculously easy to set authorizations. In the ```before_action``` callback, I could set a
method that would check to see if there is a current user based on the current session token
data. If there is a user, boom access given, however, if there is no current user, then I could
configure the app so that the unidentifiable user is redirected to a log in or a sign up page.
With our knowledge in HTTP methods, controller actions, routing, authentications and authorizations,
it's all coming together.

Taking a break here. Lots more to review and lots more to write down. Like I said, so much to
learn, so little time.

Fun Fact: In the bcrypt gem, when creating a hash, the hash begins with "$2a" which signifies
that this randomized string is a bcrypt hash. This is then followed by the complexity factor
or the level of cost that it takes to crack the hashed string/password.
