---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "App Academy Week One"
date: 2015-04-24
backgrounds:
    - https://download.unsplash.com/photo-1420819453217-57b6badd9e19
thumb: https://download.unsplash.com/photo-1422433555807-2559a27433bd
categories: aA, ruby
tags: recursion, data structures, algorithms, pair programming
---

Talk about accelerated learning. Although week one was mainly spent reviewing Ruby methods and
a few topics including recursion and searching / sorting algorithms, it felt intense. The notion
of pair programming with a different student for multiple hours everyday has been a unique experience.
The sessions varied depending on my partner's experience with programming but at the end of the day,
we gained valuable practice which better defined our strengths and weaknesses in problem solving. Here's
the daily breakdown of what we did.

Summary: Flexed my brain, pair programming is a pros/cons game with more pros, re-recurs-recursion
is going to take extra studying time, sore throat / coughing are no bueno and the first week has been
completed with some expected bumps in the road.

Day 1:

There was no time wasted. After a quick overview of the curriculum, goals, and practices of App Academy,
we jumped straight into pair programming. Partnered with Jade, we dove into Ruby's built in methods
for String, Array, Hash, and Enumerable by using the various methods to solve a set of given exercises.
Pair programming works on the basis that one person is a "navigator," or someone who dictates the direction
that the pair should take while the other is left to be a "driver", or someone who physically converts
the given directions to actual code. With the navigator's high level instructions, the driver should be
able to translate it into a valid solution for a given problem. I've noticed that this reinforces two
main concepts that I'm slowly accepting the benefits of: 1. By being to explain my thought process
in easily understood directions is a HUGE skill that undoubtedly is needed when working in a team.
Although not a glaring weakness of mine, pair programming is improving my ability in breaking down problems
into clearer logical steps. The goal is to be able to use these logical steps that anyone can follow,
regardless of background and experience. 2. Different perspectives in approaching a problem are equivalent
to flashlights in a darkroom. Although my flashlight works well in reaching a solution, someone may
bring along a more efficient flashlight that not only illuminates the answer but also accounts for
all the other nasty hidden problems that may be lurking in the dark room. I've killed the comparison,
but one thing is clear. The first solution may most likely not be the best solution where even the "best"
solution is subjective.

Working with Jade was an awesome first day of pair programming. Although I was coming down with a
cold on top of my sore throat, day one was a blast. The night was spent reviewing some of the solutions
to the in class assignments followed by reading the notes for tomorrow's topics.

Day 2:

Disaster. Laryngitis. I woke up on the next day nice and early but without the ability to speak
or swallow without pain ripping down my throat. I emailed the admins about my condition and requested
that I sadly work alone. I don't think it would be fair for my partner to be a driver with a mute
navigator. After the morning lecture, we dove into more object oriented programming with an emphasis
in constructing clean methods and proper organization. Working alone, I felt that the solution was being
reached more quickly but there was no real time to explain to myself the breakdown of the steps I took.
Not being able to talk aloud, the ideas running through my head were being hastily applied rather than
being fully thought out beforehand. My TicTacToe game seemed to run well and with the help of Velina,
 one of aA's awesome TAs, I was able to clean up and better implement some of the methods and organization
 of the project. Sure I finished the problems, but it did feel lacking compared to the
engaging environment of the day before.

Post class, I rushed home partly to limit contact with other people but also because I wanted to get
some extra rest to speed up the healing process. No notes were reviewed and the solutions would have
to be studied the following morning.

Day 3:

Disaster. It was 8 AM. I seem to have developed a cough over the course of the night that prevented
me from sleeping soundly. My usual wake time of 6AM was set so I could cook myself a decent breakfast,
read up on the day's note, and review the solutions of the previous assignments. Without that extra time,
I went to class blind. Today's lecture and assignments covered refactoring and more about hashes but
even better was the projects. Alongside my partner for the day, Simon, we created a playable
Hangman using classes to represent a board, game logic, and players (one for humans and one for
a computer AI). The board and game logic was relatively straightforward and creating a human command
line interface was also relatively easy. The computer AI was slightly more difficult, but at the end
of the project we were able to have any combination of human or computer pair to play against each other.
Having two computer players was pretty neat. The next project was creating another game, Mastermind.
Neither Simon nor I have played Mastermind, so with a bit of research we began to crack down on the
various classes and methods needed for the game. It was a similar set up as the Hangman game with
slightly different algorithms in winning the game. By the end of the project, we had a computer
player that was able to guess the code, to win the game, quickly.

Even better was that since we finished the day's assignments, we were able to explore one of the
bonus projects, Eight Queens. This challenge was finding the positions of n queens on a n x n board
so that none of the queens (chess rules for queens) would be in a position to kill each other. The
challenge itself is pretty tricky in terms of finding a solution. One possible solution we explored was
recursively backtracking the attempted positions of the queens so that at the end all possible combinations
of positions would be explored. We didn't complete it but it's been placed into my growing to-do list.

Day 4:

Recursion, oh recursion. Talk about a butt kicking. The day was rough. Progress was slow but on the flip side
I personally learned lots. This was one of the three, proclaimed by admins, hardest days in the program. I'm
not surprised by the way my brain was rewiring itself to understand recursion. Theoretically since
any iterative solution could be solved recursively, simply figuring out the base case, systematically
reducing the problem into smaller pieces and then solving from the smaller pieces was all we needed.
Steven (Laird) and I had a difficult time, to say at the least, but it was a needed change of pace.
By exploring past our base knowledge of programming, we struggled but the struggle meant improvement.
We weren't able to finish the assignments but after feeling like having gone through a battle, I felt
extra encouraged to get the concept solidified by the weekend.

Recursion is a weak point for sure but the added practice and exposure to thinking about recursive
solutions will soon be added tp my problem solving tool belt. Yes that sounded lame and I'm sticking
with it.

Day 5:

Things that go around, come around. Yesterday is recursion. Today is recursion. Working with Loren
to solve today's problems was also a struggle because both our foundations in recursion have not been
set. We were able solve all the problems, with the guidance of another awesome TA Judy, except for
the last project. We made sure that we both had a better understanding of the solutions before moving
on but I felt that Loren and I were often not one the same page. Our communication was lacking and
the problems were often left to one of us testing out various ways to implement the solution instead
of a collaborative effort. Although the pair programming paradigm may have been weak today we still
felt the joy of finding recursive solutions to many of the exercises. We used a Node class and a breadth
first method in creating a tree to map out all the possible positions that a chess knight could take
in reaching a final position. We thought the program was pretty impressive and the idea that we could
use recursive binary search trees to figure out all the possible paths was nothing sort of cool. I
got a real kick out of the concept of trees and using them in this path finding manner.

We weren't able to flesh out the details of the TicTacToe AI but I felt ready to tackle it over the
weekend. We also have an assessment coming up that initially seemed difficult but taking the time
 to work through the questions on paper, I feel much more confident. My recursion skills are still
 lacking but that's what the weekends are for!

Day 6:

Saturday is review day. A trip to aA's office to reiterate and practice the week's concept was
needed. No sore throat, slight cough and confidence to tackle the assessment is growing.



