---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "App Academy Week Three"
date: 2015-05-10
backgrounds:
    - https://download.unsplash.com/photo-1429305336325-b84ace7eba3b
thumb: https://www.dropbox.com/s/hvj4t2mx2uucsh9/w3_thumb.jpeg?dl=1
categories: app academy, database
tags: SQL, Activerecord, postgresql, sqlite3
---

    SELECT
        sql, activerecord
    FROM
        appacademy
    WHERE
        database IN ('postgresql', 'sqlite3')

Week three is all about SQL and ActiveRecord. I started with basic knowledge of SQL and by the end of the week, I was
attempting to recreate a basic version of ActiveRecord. Although it feels like a lot of ground to cover, by developing
a solid base in SQL, understanding Rails' ORM was a matter of understanding exactly what was happening underneath
abstracted and easy to read ActiveRecord methods. I understand why some people may find Rails to be "[magic](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/441717/whats-wrong-with-magic)",
because it honestly does so much for you. Associations are a matter of using a few macros, and queries can be made
with a couple of methods. Anyhow, let me break down what was covered each day that lead up to a Friday afternoon of
metaprogramming. Meta-what?

Summary: SQL. Postgresql. SQL. sqlite3. RAILS. Just kidding, just the ORM. ActiveRecord. Associations, validations and
more SQL. Indexing and optimizing queries. Metaprogramming. Project: ActiveRecordLite.

Day 14:

Studied for my OOP assessment tomorrow. I will be sleeping early and dreaming about how to best organize my classes
and methods.

Day 15:

Shortly after the assessment, we had a lecture about databases, SQL and ActiveRecord. You may have heard about databases
and how they store, well you know, data. Relational database management systems or RDBMS are programs that help manage
that data. More specifically, structured query language (SQL) is used to interact with the data. In the time spent writing
out SQL queries, I can see why it's such a powerful tool when working with large amount of data. We will mainly being
using [Postgresql](http://www.postgresql.org/), which is one of several relational database management systems. The
day was filled with queries upon queries. Working with Matt, we were able to complete the majority of the problems. The
main takeaways was learning how to join multiple tables (if needed), utilize aggregate functions such as COUNT BY, and
understanding the importance or NULL values within a database. With several hours dedicated in understanding how to go
about structuring a query so that we could pull the information we needed, I left like I had a solid foundation in
understanding basic to intermediate queries.

I finished the rest of the day's assignment which required me to write out subqueries, occasionally have a table
perform a self-join, and had to use aliases when multiple joins were needed for the same table. I have not turned into
a SQL god but it did feel good to be able to filter thousands of rows of data with a few commands. The more advanced
joins involved lots of conceptual planning that took significant amounts of time to visualize and come to.

Day 16:

SQL part two. This time we used sqlite3 which seems like a step back from using Postgresql. Sqlite3 stores data on a
file instead of a server which makes it friendly to play with. After a short lecture, we dove into SQL but with a slight
twist. We began to incorporate ruby into the mix. Using [heredocs](http://makandracards.com/makandra/1675-using-heredoc-for-prettier-ruby-code),
we could run SQL commands within a ruby method. Does that sound awesome, because it is. Ryan and I flew through most of
the problems since yesterday was also working with SQL. This was a soft intro to what an ORM really was. By hiding all
these complex SQL queries behind a method, OOP is proving once again how cool it is. We were able to finish the assignment
by the end of the day but having come across more difficult queries, I took the time to review the solutions in case
there were better ways write out a given query. Turns out regardless of a query, most RDBMS have a built in query
optimizer that takes a given query and executes said query in the most efficient possible way. Which led to topics like
database normalization which is designing of databases so that data overlap is minimized. By reducing data redundancy,
creating appropriate tables, and being wary of associations between tables, performance can be significantly increased.

I've talked about the differences between sqlite and postgres in the Heroku post if you're interested.

Day 17:

IT'S RAILS TIME. I lied. It's actually time to use our SQL skills and apply them in understanding ActiveRecord.
ActiveRecord is an object relational mapping (ORM) which is also the M in MVC in Rails. From the Rails guide/docs:

```Active Record is the M in MVC - the model - which is the layer of the system responsible for representing
business data and logic. Active Record facilitates the creation and use of business objects whose data requires
persistent storage to a database. It is an implementation of the Active Record pattern which itself is a description
of an Object Relational Mapping system.```

Which translates to tables are represented as models, rows are now objects and columns are attributes. It's a simple matter
of translating SQL into Ruby. We were able to create the tables/models using Rails migrations. I associate migrations
to git, a version control system for databases. By applying changes to a database with the use of migrations is like
applying changes to a program and committing it in git. In the same manner, migrations allow us to rollback to previous
version just like how git allows us to revert back to a previous version of a given program. Although I haven't worked
with a database that has required major changes, but I can imagine how difficult it might be without the features of
migrations.

Anyhow, the primary topics of the day were associations. Particularly the has_many, belongs_to and has_many :through
associations. These are defined in the models of each table/class and they map out the relationships between models.
It boils down to which ever table has the foreign key is usually has the belongs_to association whereas the model that
holds the reference to the foreign key holds the has_many association. A car has many wheels and a wheel belongs to a
car. The has_many :through (which has no relation to the has_many association), describes an association that actually
uses another association to create an association. Wait what? Let's take a step back. Roll the car example again.
The car has many wheels, each wheel belongs to the car, each wheel has many screws, and each screw belongs to a wheel.
So we get that a car has many screws THROUGH its association with the wheels. Although confusing at first once we worked
with multiple examples, it's all relatively clear. These through associations were also called 1-hop relations because
of how they need to hop through one association to get to another one. You can also make multiple has_many :through
associations creating n-hop relations. We created a program that would shorten URLs and be able to map which URLs
mapped to their shortened versions in a database.

Day 18:

Now, as you can imagine, databases can get massive. How do we visualize all our tables and associations? One way
is through entity relationship diagrams (ERD) which visually shows tables and their associations using lines and
special markings to describe different types of associations. Although it's not necessary, it does help in the
planning process of designing and creating a database.

Today's project was building a simple polls app which further bolstered our understanding of ActiveRecord associations.
We covered, what I consider to be one of the more interesting topics in databases, query optimization. By learning about
N + 1 queries, understanding what exactly a query would be running and being able to create customized queries that
are much more efficient than a string of ActiveRecord methods, did I feel happy I reviewed SQL. One major topic was
preloading data using the ```includes``` which could then be saved into a variable and be used without reinitializing a
new query. Hitting the database over and over for the same data is inefficient and may slow down the speed in which
some methods run. By saving the results of a query in memory, there is no need to run that query again within the same
method.

Lots of the exercises today were about optimizing our queries, usually involving custom SQL queries within the ```find_by_sql```
method. Chris and I did struggle with the last few optimizations but post class study time shed some light on how
to go about REALLY optimizing the queries.

On a completely unrelated note, there was this awesome korean food truck. I bought one of my favorite dishes called
[bibimbap](https://www.google.com/search?q=bibimbap&espv=2&biw=1280&bih=627&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=VjJQVYiWL463oQSytYCwBw&ved=0CAYQ_AUoAQ),
and hands down one of the best meals I've had in weeks. There were many foods trucks that were a part of
[Off the Grid](http://offthegridsf.com/). Check them out, it's worth it.

Day 19:

Today I struggled. It was our second solo day which involved building a simple version of ActiveRecord. This required
metaprogramming which are programs writing or operating on other programs. If that sounds abstract, eight hours
of writing out these abstract methods will really do you in. Admittedly one of the harder topics I've come across, but
at the same time, it's up there in terms of grabbing my interest. We got into the nitty gritty of programming with this
topic. By dynamically generating methods with the use of the ```define_method``` method, these methods could create
methods depending on what another method returned. We had to recreate many macros that we took for granted like
```attr_accessor```, built a simple version of ActiveRecord::Base, creating methods that would allow for table creation,
and accompany methods that would allow us to perform the common operations that would allow us to find, insert, delete and
update data. It felt like going down a rabbit hole but after building up belongs_to and has_many on my own, I felt
like I had a MUCH deeper understanding.

Day 20:

Met a friend at a cafe, studied for most of the day. Although I was comfortable with SQL, I wanted to make sure I
was confident in being able to translate SQL into associations and vice versa. I forgot to break up this week's posts
into two parts.

Day 21:

Studied some more. Wished my mother a happy mother's day because she's an awesome mom. Found that there was a Trader
Joe in the area, so I bought some bacon and made a wonderful brunch with eggs, salad, bacon and toast. Sleeping early
tonight for tomorrow's assessment.