---
layout: post
title: "Goals & Preferences"
date: 2015-07-12
backgrounds:
    - http://res.cloudinary.com/charliecloud/image/upload/v1436737065/current_goals_bg_eyqrgs.jpg
thumb: http://res.cloudinary.com/charliecloud/image/upload/v1436737061/current_goals_thumb_mye1cz.jpg
categories: general
tags: life, career
---

### Current Goals:

1. Read through the [Algorithm Design Manual](http://www.algorist.com/).
  + It's important for me to keep expanding my knowledge of common algorithms and data structures while also venturing to learn more complex algorithms and abstract data types.
  + There's also the added benefit of understanding efficacy of specific algorithms when solving for given problems.
2. Continue to work on my side project.
  + I'm currently building a tool that may be useful for future classes at App Academy. I wanted to streamline the process of practicing whiteboard problems, so this app should aid with keeping track of a student's progress, provide helpful pointers in approaching a problem, and allow for instructors to provide feedback.
3. Get to know the companies I'm interested in.
  + I've had a few phone screens/interviews this past week and have a few more this coming week. The past few have all been extraordinary in making it clear what the company was looking for, providing some insight about the culture, development cycle, etc.

I'm at a point in my career where the most important factor is personal growth as a software developer. These next few years will be critical for me to get a stronger grasp on the best development practices, design patterns and really understanding how I can contribute as a developer. It will also shed some light on whether or not I want to specialize in a particular subindustry.

As of now, I've enjoyed reading and learning about all aspects of software development. From designing the database and creating initial wireframes to building out API endpoints and the overall structure for a given app, I want to be involved in it all. However, I can't just stop there at the minimum viable product but have to go beyond the basics to continually improve, add features and to build upon a product to past the point where I can say I was proud to be a contributor.

It sounds corny, this ambition of mine, but it's where I'm at and I'm determined to make it happen.

What I'm currently reading through:

 - [The 1% Career Advice That's Actually Useful]( https://medium.com/@dotbits/the-1-career-advice-that-s-actually-useful-dc12dade830b)
