---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "App Academy Week Two"
date: 2015-05-01
backgrounds:
    - https://download.unsplash.com/photo-1415200358018-bb07fced3660
thumb: https://www.dropbox.com/s/5ediw9igq9nfjex/w2_thumb.png?dl=1
categories: app academy, ruby
tags: recursion, serialization, board games, rspec
---

Week two seems to have rushed by. The weird combination of having fun, being constantly challenged and being
frustrated has created an overall productive week. The initial feeling of uneasiness in pair programming is no longer
an issue and having the chance to work with intelligent and motivated students seems to always brighten my day. The
main topics that we touched on this week include serialization, object oriented design, exceptions/error handling,
and testing. Somewhere in the process of creating a few well known games, my understanding of these topics have most
definitely improved. In this post, I wanted to address a few highlights and problems that I came across in building
these games.

Summary: Game creating frenzy including Minesweeper, Chess, Checkers and Poker. Test driven development has equally
the same number of pros and cons for me. Object/method decomposition is a needed skill and I need to be better at it.
Learning new concepts is always fulfilling regardless of any frustration that it may entail.

Day 7 (of last week):

Free time was spent on studying for the assessment and my knowledge of recursion is shaky. Learning recursion is
like a recursion function. The base case is understanding that there are mainly three aspects in creating a recursive
solution to a problem:

1. There needs to be some sort of logic that breaks down the problem into smaller parts which are then recursively
broken down further until..

2. There's a base case. This is the foundation of any recursive solution. A base case is the return sign that tells the
function that it has come to a point where the problem has been broken down into a piece that can be simply solved.
The product of this base case is then built upon when traveling back up the recursive/call stack. Without a base case,
the function doesn't know when to stop breaking a problem down which may cause an infinite loop or throw an error.

3. The return value of the solution is of the same type that is passed up through each recursive call. This piece of
advice helped with understanding how a recursive solution was building an answer. As explained to me, if a sum is
what we eventually want to solve for, then each recursive call should return an number that can be used within the sum.

Without understanding the "base cases" of recursion, one can be left in recursion learning limbo forever and ever until,
of course, the brain throws an error "Brain not found."

Day 8:

After taking the assessment, we jumped straight into the day's topics: serialization, gems/rbenv, and Minesweeper.
Serialization is an interesting topic that I hope to get a deeper understanding of. The main concept of serialization
is that in order to be able to save data
(see: [persistence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistence_%28computer_science%29))
 for a later use or to even send it over a network, the data needs to be converted into a format that can handle
those operations. By using formats such as JSON and YAML, we can save values within files for a later time. JSON
is capable of storing numbers, string, arrays, hashes/dictionaries and is mainly used for the web. If you have used an
API, chances are that JSON was used. One notable issue with JSON is that when in comes to saving objects like Ruby classes,
JSON is unable to store a descriptive file because it mainly deals with more simple data types. So as a response, YAML
is used to mainly store Ruby objects because it neatly organizes and packages information about an object. Although both
are useful, differentiating between which format to use seems to be very important depending on the type and complexity
of the data.

Pairing with Jay, we were able to successfully build Minesweeper. I've updated our version which can be found on this
[repo](https://github.com/ChanChar/aA/blob/master/w2d1/minesweeper.rb). Although it runs out the terminal and may not
be the prettiest of games, the project was an excellent recap of previous topics. One major part of the solution was
figuring out how to reveal an area that was not seeded with bombs. In Minesweeper, from the point of the chosen tile,
the surrounding tiles up to tiles that do have an adjacent bomb are revealed. There were two main solutions that we could
think of, one being a recursive search for those tiles with an adjacent bombs or using a stack to check neighboring
tiles. The other main snag was getting down the user interface which included the ability to set a flag, reveal a tile,
or save/load the file for a later time. Mainly using the terminal and Ruby's ```gets``` function, a given input would be
translated into a command. By the end of the day, this little project was able to handle all the functionality needed
for a full game of command line Minesweeper.

The night was spent setting up [rbenv](https://github.com/sstephenson/rbenv) and reading for the following day's topics.
Although not as intuitive as python's [virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/), rbenv
did allow for easy switching amongst different ruby versions.


Day 9:

After a lecture about object oriented programming which included concepts such as inheritance and method decomposition,
we split into pairs to work on what I consider one of our larger projects, chess. Chess is a rather complex game with
multiple pieces, each with their individual rules. Through the use of abstract classes and parent classes, Mike and I,
were able to group together similarly functioning pieces. For example, the queen, bishop and rook all slide across the
board whereas the king, knight and pawn step. To address these classes, we chose to take the module route by creating
"Steppable" and "Slideable" modules that would be included within the individual piece classes. Each piece class then would
inherit from a more general Piece class that would contain methods that existed in every piece such as "#move." This
piece class served to be more of an abstract class which contained methods that would raise a NotImplementedError as a
reminder to set more specific methods for each piece.

Each piece would need the capability to check for all its valid from a position on a given board. A Board
object that would contained an instance variable to hold a 2D array of the chess pieces and empty spaces (nil) could
then be used within each piece to possible moves which could further be filtered to only provide valid moves. To filter
for valid moves, we had to deep dup the current state of the board by creating a new board instance and filling it with
a dup pieces (copies) of the original board. Which brings us to a very interesting problem of going through the trouble of
copying the board and the pieces individually. Ruby is pass by reference which means that the state of an object is linked
in memory to any variables that may hold a reference to it. Which means that when copying something like a 2D array, the
elements within the inner arrays are actually the original objects which if changed will also change the original array's
elements. By creating a new board then filling it with piece copies, we can ensure that our original board will not be
affected in any unexpected way. With that covered, by deep duping the board we were then able to use the copied board as
test runs to see which moves from all possible moves were actually valid. Valid in that they would not be moving onto a piece
where a same colored piece was nor was breaking any rules of movement (queens should not be able to slide through pieces).
By the end of day one of chess, we had an incomplete game but complete pieces which could be used.

Day 10:

Chess (continued). The whole day was spent completing the Board, Game and Player classes. The Board just needed a few
methods to check for board state which included checks for whether or not a checkmate was present, which pieces were
currently on the board, and rendering the board. The Player class would simply contained methods that would manage
move commands. I hope to build a rudimentary AI (ComputerPlayer class) during my free time. The Game class contains
all the game logic including alternating between players until a winner was found. All in all, a relatively straightforward
day. The end of the day was styling the display using the gem "colorize" for colored outputs, system "clear" to emulate
a frame refresh, and tweaking the render board function. Future updates to this project include needed refactoring and
to implement a feature that would let the players navigate the board using a the WASD keys instead of inputting board
positions for move commands.

Day 11:

After reviewing the different ways to implement the methods for chess, we had our first solo day. Solo days usually
consisted of working alone on a single project. This would allow students to better understand weaknesses and strengths.
Today's project was building checkers. Coming from chess, checkers was easier but not without its own challenges. Since
the majority of moves in checkers would be single slides or jumps, I started with making sure I got those down before
moving on to the more complicated moves like jumping more than once. Although it took roughly the whole day to get my
checkers game to a point it was playable, I felt that progress has been made. This checkers game will also go into my
things to refactor list which is steadily growing in size.

Day 12:

Before moving into SQL the following week, we started one more project to even further supplement our knowledge of OOP.
Building Poker (five card draw) was in some ways a simpler exercise in general but with added emphasis of test driven
development, the overall process would take much longer. Test driven development or TDD is a practice that relies on
the following process:

1. Write a failing test.
2. Watch it fail.
3. Create a method that minimally passes the test.
4. Write a test for added functionality.
5. Watch it fail.
6. Improve the method.
7. Repeat.

The process may seem tedious but the idea is that in general, the overall process of developing and refactoring will
be easier in the long run. Instead of building an app blindly hoping things won't unexpectedly fail (which they almost
always do), create tests along the way as the foundation for improvements can catch bugs/failures before they even happen.
I can't deny the benefits of writing tests but writing a stable app based on TDD does rely on the fact that the tests
need to be good. I feel that many people feel at ease because they simply wrote a test with no further thought beyond
that the test exists. Without considering whether or not a test is indeed testing what it should be testing, the app
could potentially have multiple tests that have no real purpose other than taking up a few lines in a file.

Anyhow, poker was built using TDD. [Rspec](http://rspec.info/) is a domain specific language completely built in Ruby
except for some of its deeper core files which are built in [cucumber](https://cukes.info/), another domain specific
language used also for testing. It was explained that using a testing language to test itself was not the most accurate
way to ensure complete coverage so cucumber was used as an external source for testing. Oscar and I started out by
planning out each of the needed classes. We would need a class for the cards, each potential hand (to calculate winning
hands), players, and one for the game itself. By building a test suite for each class before actually building the class,
we found that our process of designing the methods was much more thought out compared to blindly diving in and trying out
different solutions. Although the process of writing tests is surely smoother with experience, we found that we were
creating tests for each method initially but realized that we could test multiple methods by testing one method that would
utilize a group of methods. By targeting the methods that would be using other methods, we could have a sense of comfort
in believing that the underlying methods were functioning as intended. Unlike Python's unittests, where each test should
technically be only testing one thing (or unit), Rspec seemed to be more lenient in batching tests together. To test
private methods for a class, we would have to simply test the public methods that would use those private methods. I would
say that 60% of our day was writing tests and the remaining time was spent writing out the methods to get those tests to
pass. We weren't able to complete the game but we did leave with a stronger grasp on testing, reading tests and TDD.

Once we get into rails, we'll likely be using another testing framework like [Capybara](https://github.com/jnicklas/capybara)
to build integration, regression and functional tests. This weekend will be spent practicing for the assessment by
building Blackjack.

Day 13:

Study time. I'll be sure to post links to the projects mentioned in this post. Realizing this post is a bit too long,
I may end up splitting up posts into biweekly summaries instead of one large weekly summary.