---
layout: post
title: "HTTP Error 500"
date: 2015-03-20
backgrounds:
    - https://ununsplash.imgix.net/photo-1415773597812-902cca1c1550?q=75&fm=jpg&s=3044d482d40ae365a54b4858ac7fd4c9
thumb: https://ununsplash.imgix.net/photo-1425326452142-67c31f601d2f?q=75&fm=jpg&s=b96a3b0cd4790ed7f8ecb6fe2bd57590
categories: general, programming
tags: flask, rmotr, python
---

The project is going really well. We have authentications down, we have the backend database all set up, we can set up user
preferences, and we have managed to set up a simple clean frontend (which we'll customize later). We're currently working on
building our alerts via Flask-Mail, restructuring our directories so it's much more organized (compared to everything being
placed within one file), and completing the user settings' pages. It's all coming together.

Running into errors is a natural process of developing an app but there is one type of error that seems to provide no
significant form of help. HTTP error 500 is as checkupdown.com defines as:

>This is a 'catch-all' error generated by the Web server. Basically something has gone wrong, but the
server can not be more specific about the error condition in its response to the client.

It's the most generic form of error possible. "Hey something is wrong but we have no idea what is causing it. Have fun finding
it." This error is usually the result of missing an end tag or part of the template was being incorrectly rendered by jinja.
Now I realize that findings errors back then must have been like a 500 every time without any helper programs to produce the
all so helpful error messages of today but in 2015, I was hoping generic was dead. Beside the frustration, it is much more
fun when you can set your own HTTP error page.

In flask, I was able to use the following decorators to route to an error pages when a 404 pops up:

    from flask import Flask, render_template
    app = Flask(__name__)
    @app.errorhandler(404)
    def missing_page_error():
        return render_template("your_customized_error_page.html")

Makes developing much more fun when you have a hilarious picture to greet you every time you make a mistake.

Looks like the deadline for our project has been set for the end of the first week of April. I'll hopefully post this project
 in the project directory once we get it up on Heroku. 